.. _beta_mixture_modeling:

Beta-Mixture Modeling
=====================

scBaNdicooT uses a two-component **Beta-mixture model** to probabilistically classify each sequenced read as either nascent (newly synthesised) or background, based on T-to-C conversion rates observed in metabolically labelled RNA-seq data (e.g., 4sU or EU labelling).

Background
----------

In metabolic RNA labelling experiments, treatment with 4-thiouridine (4sU) or 5-ethynyluridine (EU) results in the incorporation of the analogue into newly synthesised RNA. During library preparation, SLAM-seq or similar chemistry converts the incorporated analogue to a cytosine analogue, producing T-to-C mismatches when reads are aligned to the reference genome.

The challenge is to distinguish true 4sU/EU-induced T-to-C conversions from background sequencing errors, which also give rise to T-to-C mismatches at a lower rate.

Model Description
-----------------

For each cell-by-gene observation, the T-to-C conversion rate is modelled as a mixture of two Beta distributions:

* **Background component** (:math:`\pi_{0}`): Represents sequencing errors and unconverted reads. Parameterised by a Beta distribution with low mean conversion rate (:math:`\alpha_{0}`, :math:`\beta_{0}`).
* **Nascent component** (:math:`\pi_{1}`): Represents reads from newly synthesised, labelled RNA. Parameterised by a Beta distribution with higher mean conversion rate (:math:`\alpha_{1}`, :math:`\beta_{1}`).

The mixture model is:

.. math::

   f(x) = \pi_{0} \cdot \text{Beta}(x; \alpha_{0}, \beta_{0}) + \pi_{1} \cdot \text{Beta}(x; \alpha_{1}, \beta_{1})

where:

* :math:`x` is the observed T-to-C conversion rate for a given read/UMI.
* :math:`\pi_{0} + \pi_{1} = 1` are the mixing proportions (background and nascent fractions).
* :math:`\alpha_{0}, \beta_{0}` and :math:`\alpha_{1}, \beta_{1}` are the shape parameters of the two Beta components.

EM Algorithm
------------

Parameters are estimated using the **Expectation-Maximisation (EM)** algorithm:

**E-step**: Compute the posterior probability that each observation belongs to the nascent component:

.. math::

   r_{i} = \frac{\pi_{1} \cdot \text{Beta}(x_{i}; \alpha_{1}, \beta_{1})}{\pi_{0} \cdot \text{Beta}(x_{i}; \alpha_{0}, \beta_{0}) + \pi_{1} \cdot \text{Beta}(x_{i}; \alpha_{1}, \beta_{1})}

**M-step**: Update parameters to maximise the expected complete-data log-likelihood:

* Update mixing proportions: :math:`\hat{\pi}_{1} = \frac{1}{N} \sum_i r_{i}`
* Update Beta shape parameters :math:`(\alpha, \beta)` via method-of-moments or numerical maximisation.

The algorithm iterates until convergence (change in log-likelihood below a threshold) or until the maximum number of iterations is reached.

Nascent Read Calling
--------------------

After model fitting, each UMI is assigned a **posterior probability of being nascent** (:math:`r_{i}`). A read is classified as nascent if :math:`r_{i}` exceeds a user-defined threshold (default: 0.5).

Three output matrices are produced per sample:

.. list-table::
   :widths: 20 80
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Output
     - Description
   * - **Nascent**
     - Gene-by-cell matrix counting UMIs classified as nascent (:math:`r_{i} \geq 0.5`).
   * - **Total**
     - Gene-by-cell matrix counting all UMIs regardless of classification.
   * - **NTR**
     - Nascent-to-total ratio matrix (nascent / total per gene per cell).

Interpreting the NTR
--------------------

The nascent-to-total ratio (NTR) provides a measure of the relative transcriptional activity for each gene in each cell:

* **High NTR** (close to 1): Most RNA for that gene is newly synthesised, indicating active transcription.
* **Low NTR** (close to 0): Most RNA is pre-existing, indicating low current transcriptional activity or high transcript stability.
* **NTR** captures dynamic changes that are invisible in steady-state total RNA data.

Model Diagnostics
-----------------

The HTML summary reports generated by scBaNdicooT include per-sample model diagnostic plots:

* **Conversion rate distributions**: Histogram of observed T-to-C rates overlaid with fitted Beta-mixture components.
* **Component separation**: Visualisation of background vs. nascent component overlap.
* **π₁ estimates**: The estimated nascent fraction per sample/cell (:math:`\hat{\pi}_{1}`), useful for assessing labelling efficiency.

References
----------

The beta-mixture modeling approach is adapted from:

* Qiu, X. *et al.* (2022). **scNT-seq enables dynamic profiling of transcriptional responses at single-cell resolution**. *Nature Methods*.
* Erhard, F. *et al.* (2019). **scSLAM-seq reveals core features of transcription dynamics in single cells**. *Nature*.
